Model 7.0 (testing) intervention model (#1791)
ihmeuw/vivarium_research: docs/source/models/intervention_models/alzheimers/testing_diagnosis.rst

Intervention Overview
-----------------------

Alzheimer's testing is classified into two groups - baseline (CSF and PET) testing, 
and BBBM testing. Baseline testing already exists in present-day conditions, before the 
hypothetical introduction of BBBM testing in :ref:`Alternative Scenario 1 <alz_scenarios>`.
The introduction of BBBM testing will replace some number of the baseline tests in 
Alternative Scenario 1, and will also be used to inform treatment in Alternative 
Scenario 2. 

Vivarium Modeling Strategy
--------------------------

Baseline testing - CSF and PET
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

CSF and PET are existing biomarker tests which can identify cases of Alzheimer's disease.
We model CSF and PET tests in our :ref:`Reference Scenario <alz_scenarios>` in order to
estimate the number of these more expensive, invasive tests which would be replaced
by the introduction of BBBM tests in :ref:`Alternative Scenario 1 <alz_scenarios>`.

Location-specific testing rates
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
US testing rates among patients who are diagnosed with MCI or dementia are given 

> in Figure 3 `here <https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC12321507/>`_ (overall cohort).

Reviewer: Can you please add a references section? See example: https://vivarium-research.readthedocs.io/en/latest/models/intervention_models/intrapartum/misoprostol_intervention.html#references

We adjust these US CSF and PET testing rates upwards (2x) due to subsequent 
increases in coverage by Medicare, and add substantial uncertainty (-50% for the lower 
bound and +50% for the upper bound).

To reach CSF and PET testing rates for other countries, we adjust the (increased) US test rates based on 
per capita `Alzheimer's pharmaceutical spending <https://brainhealthatlas.org/data/economic-impact/bar>`_.
For example, a country spending 10% of the US would have CSF and PET testing rates equal to 
10% of the US.

Due to a 
`high perentage of CSF testing <https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2274580724001195?via%3Dihub#bib22>`_
in Sweden, we further adjust Sweden's CSF rate to be 9x its PET rate from the previous step.

We use these location-specific test rates to determine how likely a simulant with 

> MCI is to receieve a CSF or PET test, and which test they should receive.

Reviewer: Keeping this information on how we got the numbers is good! Just add a table with the final values.

.. todo::

  Distribution for draws with test rate upper/lower bounds?

Implementation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Each simulant will be assigned a propensity (0 to 1) for receiving a test. The propensity will apply for the 
simulant's lifetime.

On each timestep, use the following steps to assign CSF and PET tests:

1. Assess eligibility based on the following requirements:

  - Simulant is in MCI stage
  - Simulant age is >=60 and <80
  - Simulant has never recieved a CSF or PET test before
  - Simulant has never recieved a positive BBBM test before
  - Propensity is higher than location-specific testing rate

2. If eligible (meets all requirements), give test. If not, do not give test. Do not assign a diagnosis.

> 3. Assign if it was a CSF or PET test based on location-specific rates.

Author: I'll clarify how this is calculated. Happy to add a data table as well though seems a bit redundant as I'll be adding the data to the artifact as well - the audience for this doc is the engineers right?

> 3. Assign if it was a CSF or PET test based on location-specific rates.

Reviewer: The audience is primarily engineers but not entirely. CSU is looking at these for research details, and we generally publish links when we write papers. Also, one of the most common users is researchers a year later when the project gets renewed and we're trying to figure out what happened! 

I think if the first data table is included and it's clear how to convert to relative percent values it's fine.

Assumptions and Limitations
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
- Uses same age limits as BBBM testing due to similar assumptions that tests
  are not useful at the younger/older ages 
- A simulant with an eligible propensity will be tested at the first time step 
  they satisfy the MCI and age criteria, and then can never be tested again, 
  so propensity does not need to be re-assigned at any point
- Assume no testing in pre-clinical or AD dementia states
- Not used to assign treatment (no diagnosis)

> 

Author: Let me know how this looks in the new version

and then maxes out at 60% in 2045. 

Implementation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
The simulant's baseline testing propensity will also be used as their BBBM testing propensity.

On each timestep, use the following steps to assign CSF and PET tests:

1. Assess eligibility based on the following requirements:

  - Simulant is in pre-clinical stage
  - Simulant age is >=60 and <80
  - Simulant has not received a BBBM test in the last three years
  - Simulant has never recieved a positive BBBM test
  - Propensity is higher than year-specific testing rate

2. If eligible (meets all requirements), give test. If not, do not give test.
3. If given test, assign positive diagnosis to 90% of people and negative diagnosis to 10% of people. This 90% draw should be independent of any previous draws, eg people who test negative still have a 90% chance of being positive on a re-test.
4. Record time of last test, yes/no diagnosis for future testing eligibility.

Assumptions and Limitations
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
- Since BBBM testing eligibility is pre-clinical stage and CSF/PET is MCI stage, 
  and simulants cannot move backwards, CSF/PET test history is irrelevant to BBBM 

>   test elibibility 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  test eligibility 
```

- The same simulants undergo repeat testing to reflect ongoing issues with access or insurance,
  so propensity does not need to be re-assigned at any point.
- Since BBBM uses the same propensity as baseline testing, BBBM should mostly replace CSF and PET
  testing, though some simulants may reach age 60 in the MCI stage, or get a BBBM false negative.

.. todo::
  People who are not simulated (will not develop AD dementia) will also be tested, and these tests,
  including false positives, will need to be counted (outside the simulation).

Initialization of test history
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
On initialization no one will have been tested. Due to test coverage jumping from 0% to 10% in 2030,
we would expect a large group to be immediately tested and then a drop-off in testing counts.

Observer
~~~~~~~~

> Need an observer with test counts by location, age, sex, year, and diagnosis provided 

Reviewer: We should put the observer on the main concept model page here: https://vivarium-research.readthedocs.io/en/latest/models/concept_models/vivarium_alzheimers/concept_model.html#outputs-and-observers 

If you don't want to include the other page in this PR, you can juts remove for now.

> Validation and Verification Criteria

Reviewer: Similarly, this lives on the main concept model page here: https://vivarium-research.readthedocs.io/en/latest/models/concept_models/vivarium_alzheimers/concept_model.html#v-v-tracking 

So you only need to do this when you make a run request.

per capita Alzheimer's pharmaceutical spending from [Brain-Health-Atlas]_.
For example, a country spending 10% of the US would have CSF and PET testing rates equal to 
10% of the US.

Due to a high perentage of CSF testing in Sweden [Mattke-et-al-2024-Sweden-Capacity]_, 
we further adjust Sweden's CSF rate to be 9x its PET rate from the previous step.

We use these location-specific test rates to determine how likely a simulant with 
MCI is to receieve a CSF or PET test, and which test they should receive.

.. list-table:: Location-specific test rates
  :widths: 15 15 15
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Location
    - CSF mean % (Confidence)
    - PET mean % (Confidence)
  * - US
    - 4.4 (2.2, 6.6)
    - 1.4 (.70, 2.1)
  * - Germany
    - 2.8 (1.4, 4.2)
    - .89 (.44, 1.3)
  * - Spain
    - 1.4 (.70, 2.1)
    - .45 (.22, .67)
  * - Sweden
    - 3.8 (1.9, 5.7)
    - .42 (.21, .63)
  * - UK
    - 1.3 (.65, 2.0)
    - .41 (.21, .62)
  * - Japan
    - 1.3 (.65, 1.9)
    - .41 (.21, .62)
  * - Israel
    - .43 (.21, .64)
    - .14 (.07, .20)
  * - Taiwan
    - .42 (.21, .63)
    - .13 (.07, .20)
  * - Brazil
    - .12 (.06, .18)
    - .04 (.02, .06)
  * - China
    - .08 (.04, .12)

>     - .02 (.01, .04)

Author: Clarify denominator

Implementation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Each simulant will be assigned a propensity (0/high to 1/low) for receiving a test. The propensity will apply for the 

> simulant's lifetime.

Reviewer 2: Do we want to keep the same propensity throughout the simulant's lifetime, or do we want to update it on each timestep? If we don't update every timestep, then each simulant will either get a test on the first timestep they are eligible, or they'll never get a test (here I'm using the word "eligible" in the clinical sense, not taking the propensity into account as in the definition of eligibility in the docs). Does that seem right? Is that what we want?

I guess if we _did_ update the propensity every timestep, would that throw off our calibration? (I.e., would we get more testing than we want because each simulant has multiple chances to get tested?)

Reviewer 3: This seems like something where it might be better to [do something in-between](https://vivarium-research.readthedocs.io/en/latest/models/concept_models/vivarium_census_synthdata/concept_model.html#propensities), if you can figure out how to calibrate it

Reviewer 4: I suggest we keep it simple, the exact timing is not particularly important.  We can note this as a potential area for improvement in the future.

On timestep
'''''''''''
On each timestep, use the following steps to assign CSF and PET tests:

1. Assess eligibility based on the following requirements:

  - Simulant is in MCI stage
  - Simulant age is >=60 and <80
  - Simulant has never recieved a CSF or PET test before

>   - Simulant has never recieved a positive BBBM test before

Reviewer 2: Is this asymmetry between CSF/PET vs. BBBM intentional? I.e., you've never received a CSF or PET test (whether positive or negative), and you've never received a _positive_ BBBM test (but you may have had a negative BBBM test)?

>   - Propensity is higher than location-specific testing rate (CSF rate plus PET rate)

Reviewer 2: Yeah, with this ordering (which is our usual ordering, I guess), it should really be described as the propensity for _not_ getting tested.

Unless there is a specific reason we need to pay attention to the ordering (e.g., the propensity correlations for the facility choice model in MNCNH), we could just leave it unspecified whether higher values correspond to more testing or less testing.

2. If eligible (meets all requirements), give test. If not, do not give test. Do not assign a diagnosis.

> 3. Assign if it was a CSF or PET test based on location-specific rates. If propensity is higher than CSF testing rate: give a CSF test. Otherwise, propensity must be lower than CSF testing rate but higher than CSF + PET rate: give a PET test.

Reviewer 2: I think maybe you just switched the words "higher" and "lower"?

But we could also just describe this as a categorical random variable with three categories (CSF, PET, None) and corresponding probabilities (0.044, 0.014, 1 - 0.044 - 0.014), and tell the engineers to sample this variable using the propensity. They should have a standard way they do that (e.g., maybe [this algorithm](https://vivarium-research.readthedocs.io/en/latest/models/other_models/facility_choice/index.html#causal-conditional-probabilities-for-in-facility-delivery:~:text=If%20the%20categories,its%20corresponding%20propensity.), which might be the same as what you're trying to describe), and we don't have to work through the math every time.

  so propensity does not need to be re-assigned at any point
- Assume no testing in pre-clinical or AD dementia states
- Not used to assign treatment (no diagnosis)
- Eligibility requirements impact the number of tests. The earlier the stage simulants
  are tested in, the more tests will be conducted (eg MCI vs mild stage). The wider 
  the age range, the more tests will be conducted. 

BBBM testing
~~~~~~~~~~~~

BBBM testing is a hypothetical biomarker test which we will model in 
:ref:`Alternative Scenario 1 <alz_scenarios>`. It will replace some CSF/PET testing and 
assign positive/negative diagnosis which will inform treatment in :ref:`Alternative Scenario 2 <alz_scenarios>`.

Year-specific testing rates
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Testing rates do not vary by location, age or sex. 
In 2020, 0% of eligible simulants are tested annually. This increases to 10% in 2030, 
then increases linearly over time in each six-month period to reach 20% in 2035, to 40% in 2040 
and then maxes out at 60% in 2045. 

Implementation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
The simulant's baseline testing propensity will also be used as their BBBM testing propensity.

On timestep
'''''''''''

> On each timestep, use the following steps to assign CSF and PET tests:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
On each timestep, use the following steps to assign BBBM tests:
```
